```text
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
Copyright (c) 2019 Intel Corporation
```
<!-- omit in toc -->
# Userspace CNI
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Setup Userspace CNI](#setup-userspace-cni)
- [HugePages configuration](#hugepages-configuration)
- [Pod deployment](#pod-deployment)
- [Virtual interface usage](#virtual-interface-usage)

## Overview

Userspace CNI is a Container Network Interface (CNI) Kubernetes\* plugin that was designed to simplify the process of deployment of DPDK-based applications in Kubernetes pods. The plugin uses Kubernetes and Multus CNI CRDs to provide pods with a virtual DPDK-enabled Ethernet port. In this document, you can find details about how to install OpenNESS with Userspace CNI support and how to use its main features.

## Setup Userspace CNI

OpenNESS for Network Edge has been integrated with Userspace CNI to allow users to easily run DPDK- based applications inside Kubernetes pods. To install OpenNESS Network Edge with Userspace CNI support, add the value `userspace` to variable `kubernetes_cnis` in `group_vars/all/10-default.yml` and set value of the variable `kubeovn_dpdk` in `group_vars/all/10-default.yml` to `true`:

```yaml
# group_vars/all/10-default.yml
kubernetes_cnis:
- kubeovn
- userspace
```

```yaml
# group_vars/all/10-default.yml
kubeovn_dpdk: true
```

## HugePages configuration

DPDK apps require that a specific number of HugePages are enabled. By default, the Ansible\* scripts will enable 1024 of 2M HugePages on a system and then start OVS-DPDK with 1Gb of those HugePages. To change this setting to reflect your specific requirements, set the Ansible variables as defined in the example below. This example enables 4 of 1GB HugePages and appends 1 GB to OVS-DPDK, leaving 3 pages for DPDK applications that will be running in the pods.

```yaml
# group_vars/controller_group/10-default.yml
hugepage_size: "1G"
hugepage_amount: "4"
```

```yaml
# group_vars/edgenode_group/10-default.yml
hugepage_size: "1G"
hugepage_amount: "4"
```

```yaml
# group_vars/all/10-default.yml
# Hugepage size to be used with DPDK: 2Mi or 1Gi
kubeovn_dpdk_hugepage_size: "1Gi"
# Overall amount of hugepages available to DPDK
kubeovn_dpdk_hugepages: "1Gi"
```

## Pod deployment

To deploy a pod with a DPDK interface, create a pod with `hugepages` mounted to `/dev/hugepages`, host directory `/var/run/openvswitch/` (with mandatory trailing slash character) mounted into the pod with the volume name `shared-dir` (the name `shared-dir` is mandatory), and `userspace-openness` network annotation. Find an example pod definition with two DPDK ports below:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: userspace-example
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: userspace-openness, userspace-openness
spec:
  containers:
  - name: userspace-example
    image: image-name
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    securityContext:
      privileged: true
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /ovs
      name: shared-dir
    - mountPath: /dev/hugepages
      name: hugepages
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 1Gi
      limits:
        hugepages-1Gi: 2Gi
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  volumes:
  - name: shared-dir
    hostPath:
      path: /var/run/openvswitch/
  - name: hugepages
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages
```

## Virtual interface usage

Socket files for virtual interfaces generated by Userspace CNI are created on the host machine in `/var/run/openvswitch` directory. This directory has to be mounted into your pod by volume with **obligatory name `shared-dir`** (in our [example pod definition](#pod-deployment) `/var/run/openvswitch` is mounted to pod as `/ovs`). You can then use the sockets available from your mount-point directory in your DPDK-enabled application deployed inside a pod. Find more examples in [Userspace CNI's documentation](https://github.com/intel/userspace-cni-network-plugin#testing-with-dpdk-testpmd-application).

>**NOTE**: When 2MB HugePages are enabled for Userspace CNI there is a limitation to [how many memory regions can be used by Virtio](https://doc.dpdk.org/guides/howto/virtio_user_for_container_networking.html#limitations) - in an event where number of memory regions is exceeded by DPDK application, a flag '--single-file-segments' needs to be added to the applications starting command line.

